---
title: Working Group GitHub Usage Guidance
abbrev: GitHub Usage Guidance
docname: draft-ietf-git-using-github-latest
category: bcp
area: General
workgroup: Network
ipr: trust200902

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, docmapping]

author:
 -
   ins: M. Thomson
   name: Martin Thomson
   org: Mozilla
   email: mt@lowentropy.net
 -
   ins: B. Stark
   name: Barbara Stark
   org: AT&T
   email: barbara.stark@att.com

informative:

--- abstract

This document describes best practices for Working Groups that use GitHub for
their work.


--- note_Note_to_Readers

Discussion of this document takes place on the GitHub@ietf mailing list
(ietf-and-github@ietf.org), which is archived at
<https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search?email_list=ietf-and-github>.

Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
<https://github.com/ietf-gitwg/using-github>.


--- middle

# Introduction

The IETF has an open and transparent process for developing standards.  The use
of GitHub or similar tools, when used as part of this process, can have several
objectives.  GitHub provides tools that can be helpful in editing documents.
Use of this service has been found to reduce the time that Working Groups need
to produce documents and to improve the quality of the final result.

The use of version control improves traceability and visibility of changes.
Issue tracking can be used to manage open issues and provide a record of their
resolution.  Pull requests allow for better engagement on technical and
editorial changes, and encourage contributions from a larger set of
contributors.  Using GitHub can also broaden the community of contributors for a
specification.

The main purpose of this document is providing guidelines for how Working Groups
might integrate the capabilities provided by GitHub into their processes for
developing Internet-Drafts.

This document is meant as a supplement to existing Working Group practices.  It
provides guidance to Working Group chairs and participants on how they can best
use GitHub within the framework established by RFC 2418 {{?RFC2418}}.  This
document aims to establish norms that reduce the variation in usage patterns
between different Working Groups and to help avoid issues that have been
encountered in the past.

A companion document, {{?GH-CONFIG=I-D.ietf-git-github-wg-configuration}},
describes administrative processes that support the practices described in this
document.

Although similar, guidance for IRTF Research Groups is out of scope for this document.
However, such groups may draw inspiration for GitHub use from the contents herein.

## Distributed Version Control Systems

Version control systems are a critical component of software engineering and are
also quite useful for document editing.

Git is a distributed version control system that can operate without a central
service.  Each instance of a repository contains a number of revisions.  Each
revision stores the complete state of a set of files.  Users are able to create
new revisions in their copy of a repository and share revisions between copies
of repositories.


## GitHub

GitHub is a service operated at [https://github.com/](https://github.com/).
GitHub provides centralized storage for git repositories.  GitHub is freely
accessible on the open Internet, albeit currently only via IPv4.

GitHub provides a simplified and integrated interface to not only git, but also
provides basic user management, an issue tracker, associated wikis, project
hosting, and other features.

There are a large number of projects at GitHub and a very large community of
contributors.  One way in which some IETF Working Groups have benefited is
through increased numbers of reviews and associated issues, along with other
improvements that come from broader participation by facilitating those
in the community to participate.

## Other Services

Git is not the only version control system available, nor is GitHub the only
possible choice for hosting.  There are other services that host revision
control repositories and provide similar additional features to GitHub.  For
instance, [BitBucket](https://bitbucket.org/) and
[GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com/) provide similar feature sets.  In addition
to a hosted service, software for custom installations exists.

This document concentrates primarily on GitHub as it has a large and active
community of contributors.  As a result, some content might not be applicable to
other similar services.  A Working Group that decides to adopt an alternative
tool or service can still benefit from the general guidance in this document.


## Document Goals

This document aims to describe how a Working Group might best apply GitHub to
their work.  The intent is to allow each Working Group considerable flexibility
in how they use GitHub.

This document does require that policies for use of GitHub are agreed and
clearly communicated within the Working Group (see {{policy}}).  The remainder
of the document contains guidelines and advice on how to construct a workable
policy.

The requirements here apply to the case where Working Groups decide to use
GitHub as a primary means of interaction.  Individuals can set their own
policies when using GitHub for managing their own drafts, or for managing drafts
that they edit on behalf of a Working Group that has not explicitly adopted
GitHub.

For both sets of users, this document aims to provide some amount of advice on
practices that have been effective.

This document only aims to address use of GitHub in developing documents.
Working Groups could choose to use the tool to aid in managing their charter or
session materials such as agendas, minutes, and presentations.  Though the
advice here might apply more broadly, using GitHub to manage other material is
out of scope for this document.


## Notational Conventions

The words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", and "MAY"
are used in this document. It's not shouting; when they are capitalized,
they have the special meaning defined in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}}.


# Administrative Policies {#policy}

The following administrative rules provide the necessary oversight and
transparency.


## Organizations

Organizations are a way of forming groups of contributors on GitHub.
Each Working Group SHOULD create a new organization for the Working Group.
A Working Group organization SHOULD be named consistently so that it can be
found.  For instance, the name could be ietf-wg-\<wgname>, as recommended in
{{?GH-CONFIG=I-D.ietf-git-github-wg-configuration}}.

A single organization SHOULD NOT be used for all IETF activity, or all activity
within an area. Large organizations create too much overhead for general
management tasks, particularly when there is a need to maintain membership.

Each organization requires owners.  The owner team for a Working Group
repository MUST include responsible Area Directors.  Area Directors MAY also
designate a delegate that becomes an owner and Working Group chairs MAY also be
owners.

A team with administrator access SHOULD be created for the Working Group Chairs
and any Working Group Secretary.  Administrator access is preferable, since this
does not also include the ability to push to all repositories and ownership does
not grant any other significant privileges.

Details about creating organizations adhering to these guidelines can be found
in {{!GH-CONFIG=I-D.ietf-git-github-wg-configuration}}.


## Communicating Policies {#notices}

Each Working Group MAY set its own policy as to whether and how it uses GitHub.
It is important that occasional participants in the WG and others accustomed to
IETF tools be able to determine this and easily find the policy and GitHub
organization.

A simple example of how to do this is to include a link to the GitHub
organization on the WG Charter page in the datatracker.  Similarly, if there are
multiple mailing list options, links to those mailing lists should be given.

Repositories MUST include a copy or reference to the policy that applies to
managing any documents they contain.  Updating the README or CONTRIBUTING file
in the repository with details of the process ensures that the process is
recorded in a stable location other than the mailing list archive.  This also
makes Working Group policies available to casual contributors who might only
interact with the GitHub repository.

GitHub prominently links to the CONTRIBUTING file on certain pages.  This file
SHOULD be used in preference to the README for information that new contributors
need.  The README SHOULD contain a link to the CONTRIBUTING file.

In addition to Working Group policies, notices on repositories MUST include
citations for the [IETF Note Well](https://www.ietf.org/about/note-well/).

# Deciding to Use GitHub

Working Group Chairs are responsible for determining how to best accomplish
the Charter in an open and transparent fashion.  The Working Group Chairs are
responsible for determining if there is interest in using GitHub and making a
consensus call to determine if the proposed policy and use is acceptable.

Chairs MUST involve Area Directors in any decision to use GitHub for anything
more than managing drafts.


## What to Use GitHub For {#usage}

Working Group Chairs decide what GitHub features the Working Group will rely
upon.  {{features}} contains a more thorough discussion on the different
features that can be used.

Working Group Chairs that decide to use GitHub MUST inform their Working Groups
of their decision on the Working Group mailing list.  An email detailing how the
Working Group intends to use GitHub is sufficient, though it might be helpful to
occasionally remind new contributors of these guidelines.

Working Group Chairs are responsible for ensuring that any policy they adopt is
enforced and maintained.

The set of GitHub features ({{features}}) that the Working Group relies upon
need to be clearly documented in policies.  This document provides some guidance
on potential policies and how those might be applied.

Features that the Working Group does not rely upon SHOULD be made available to
document editors.  Editors are then able to use these features for their own
purposes.  For example, though the Working Group might not formally use issues
to track items that require further discussion in order to reach consensus,
keeping the issue tracker available to editors can be valuable.

Working Group policies need to be set with the goal of improving transparency,
participation, and ultimately the quality of the consensus behind documents.  At
times, it might be appropriate to impose some limitations on what document
editors are able to do in order to serve these goals.  Chairs SHOULD
periodically consult with document editors to ensure that policies are
effective.

A document editor can still use GitHub independently for documents that they
edit, even if the Working Group does not expressly choose to use GitHub.  Any
such public repository MUST follow the IETF Note Well and bear notices; see
{{notices}}.  This recognizes that editors have traditionally chosen their own
methods for managing the documents they edit but preserves the need for
contributors to understand their obligations with respect to IETF processes.


## Repositories

New repositories can be created within the Working Group organization at the
discretion of the chairs.  Chairs could decide to only create new repositories
for adopted Working Group items, or they might create repositories for
individual documents on request.

All repositories for Working Group documents within the Working Group
organization MUST be public.  Repositories for private documents MAY be
kept private, but only where there is a specific reason for doing so.  For
instance, a document that details a security vulnerability might be kept
private prior to its initial publication as an Internet-Draft. Once an
Internet-Draft is published, repositories SHOULD be made public.

The adoption status of any document MUST be clear from the contents of the
repository.  This can be achieved by having the name of the document reflect
status (that is, draft-ietf-\<wgname>-... indicates that the document was
adopted), or through a prominent notice (such as in the README).

Experience has shown that maintaining separate repositories for independent
documents is most manageable.  This allows the work in that repository to be
focused on a single item.

Closely related documents, such as those that together address a single
milestone, might be placed in a single repository.  This allows editors to more
easily manage changes and issues that affect multiple documents.

Maintaining multiple documents in the same repository can add overhead that
negatively affects individual documents.  For instance, issues might require
additional markings to identify the document that they affect.  Also, because
editors all have write access to the repository, managing the set of people with
write access to a larger repository is more difficult ({{editors}}).


## Editors and Contributors {#editors}

Working Group chairs MUST give document editors write access to document
repositories.  This can be done by creating teams with write access and
allocating editors to those teams, or by making editors collaborators on the
repository.

Working Group chairs MAY also grant other individuals write access for other
reasons, such as maintaining supporting code or build configurations.  Working
Group chairs, as administrators or owners of the organization might also have
write access to repositories.  Users other than document editors, including
chairs, SHOULD NOT write to Working Group documents without prior coordination
with document editors.

Working Groups MAY create a team for regular contributors that is only given
read access to a repository. This does not confer additional privileges on these
contributors, it instead allows for issues and pull requests to be assigned to
those people.  This can be used to manage the assignment of editorial or review
tasks to individuals outside of the editor team.


## Document Formats

In addition to the canonical XML format {{?RFC7991}}, document editors might
choose to use a different input form for editing documents, such as Markdown.
Markdown-based formats are more accessible for new contributors, though
ultimately decisions about format is left to document editors.

Formats that are not text-based SHOULD NOT be used, as these are ill-disposed
to the sorts of interaction that revision control enables.


# Contribution Methods {#features}

Contributions to documents come in many forms.  GitHub provides a range of
options in addition to email.  Input on GitHub can take the form of new issues
and pull requests, comments on issues and pull requests, and comments on
commits.


## Issue Tracker

The GitHub issue tracker can be an effective way of managing the set of open
issues on a document.  Issues - both open and closed - can be a useful way of
recording decisions made by a Working Group.

Issues can be given arbitrary labels, assigned to contributors, and assembled
into milestones.  The issue tracker is integrated into the repository; an issue
can be closed using a special marker in a commit message.

When deciding to use GitHub, Working Group Chairs MUST decide how the GitHub
issue tracker is used.  Use of the issue tracker could be limited to recording
the existence of issues, or it might be used as the venue for substantial
technical discussion between contributors.

A Working Group policy MAY require that all substantive changes be tracked using
issues.  Suggested policies for the use of the GitHub issue tracker are the
primary subject of {{modes}}.


### Issue Labels

A system of labeling issues can be effective in managing issues.  For instance,
marking substantive issues separately from editorial can be helpful at guiding
discussion.  Using labels can also be helpful in identifying issues for which
consensus has been achieved, but that require editors to integrate the changes
into a document.

Labels can be used to identify particular categories of issues or to mark
specific issues for discussion at an upcoming session.

If labels are a core part of Working Group process, chairs MUST communicate any
process to the Working Group.  This includes the semantics of labels, and who
can apply and remove these labels.  {{labels}} describes some basic strategies
that might be adopted to manage decision-making processes.


### Closing Issues

Editors have write access to repositories, which also allows them to close
issues.  The user that opens an issue is also able to close the issue.  Chairs
MUST provide guidance on who is permitted to close an issue and under what
conditions.

Restrictions on closing issues are generally not advisable until a document has
reached a certain degree of maturity.


### Reopening Issues

Issues that have reached a resolution that has Working Group consensus MUST NOT
be reopened unless new information is presented.

For long-running work items, new contributors often raise issues that have
already been resolved. Chairs need to assess whether the arguments offered
represent new information or not.  This can require some discussion to determine
accurately.  Resolved issues MUST remain closed unless there is consensus to
reopen an issue.


## Pull Requests

Pull requests are the GitHub feature that allow users to request changes to a
repository.  A user does not need to have write access to a repository to create
a pull request.  A user can create a "fork", or copy, of any public repository.
The user has write access to their own fork, allowing them to make local
changes.  A pull request asks the owner of a repository to merge a specific set
of changes from a fork (or any branch) into their copy.

Editors SHOULD make pull requests for all substantial changes rather than
committing directly to the "master" branch of the repository. See {{mature-documents}}
for discussion on what constitutes a substantial change. A pull request
creates an artifact that records the reasons for changes and provides other
contributors with an opportunity to review the change. Pull requests that
address substantive issues SHOULD mention the issue they address in the opening
comment.

Note:

: This document assumes that there is a unified effort on a document, all
  concentrated on a git "master" branch.  More advanced usage of git is not in
  the scope of this document.

Pull requests have many of the same properties as issues, including the ability
to host discussion and bear labels.  Critically, using pull requests creates a
record of actions taken.

For significant changes, leaving a pull request open until discussion of the
issue within the Working Group concludes allows the pull request to track the
discussion and properly capture the outcome of discussions.  Pull requests can
be updated as discussions continue or in response to feedback.

Groups of editors could adopt a practice of having one editor create a pull
request and another merge it.  This ensures that changes are reviewed by
editors.  Editors are given discretion in how they manage changes.


### Discussion on Pull Requests

In addition to the features that pull requests share with issues, users can also
review the changes in a pull request.  This is a valuable feature, but it has
some issues.

Comments in a review other than a summary are attached to specific lines of the
proposed change.  Such comments can be hard or impossible to find if changes are
subsequently made to the pull request.  This is problematic for contributors who
do not track discussion closely.

For this reason, Working Group chairs SHOULD discourage the use of inline
comments for substantial technical discussion of issues.


### Merging Pull Requests

Working Groups MUST determine who is permitted to merge pull requests.  Document
editors SHOULD be permitted to merge pull requests at their discretion.  This
requires that editors exercise some judgment.  Working Group chairs MAY
occasionally identify a pull request and request that editors withhold merging
until Working Group consensus has been assessed.

Note that the copy of a document that is maintained on GitHub does not need to
be a perfect reflection of Working Group consensus at every point in time.
Document editors need some flexibility in how they manage a document.


## Monitoring Activity

GitHub produces individualized email notifications of activity that each user
can adjust to their preferences.  In addition to these, some Working Groups have
created read-only mailing lists that receive notifications about activity on
Working Group repositories.  The volume of information on these lists can be too
high to monitor actively, but access to an archive of actions can be useful.

An alternative is to rely on periodic email summaries of activity, such as those
produced by a notification tool like
[github-notify-ml](https://github.com/dontcallmedom/github-notify-ml).  This
tool has been used effectively in several Working Groups, though it requires
server infrastructure.


# Typical Working Group Policies {#modes}

Current experience with use of GitHub suggests a few different approaches to
greater use of the tool in Working Groups.

This section describes some basic modes for interacting with GitHub, each
progressively more involved. This starts with a very lightweight interaction
where document management is the only feature that is formally used, then
progressively more intensive use of the GitHub issue tracking capabilities are
described.  These approaches differ primarily in how discussion of substantive
matters is managed.  Most of the advice in this document applies equally to all
models.

Working Groups can adjust these policies to suit their needs, but are advised to
avoid gratuitous changes for the sake of consistency across the IETF as a whole.


## Document Management Mode

In this mode of interaction, GitHub repositories are used to manage changes to
documents, but the bulk of the work is conducted using email, face-to-face
meetings, and other more traditional interactions.  The intent of this policy is
to enable document and issue management using GitHub while minimizing the
complexity of the process.

In the version of this mode with the least interaction with GitHub, a repository
is created for the purposes of document management by editors.  Editors might
maintain issues and pull requests for their own benefit, but these have no
formal standing in the Working Group process.


## Issue Tracking Mode

In addition to managing documents, the Working Group might choose to use GitHub
for tracking outstanding issues.  In this mode of interaction, all substantive
technical discussions are tracked as issues in the issue tracker.  However,
discussion of any substantial matters is always conducted on mailing lists.

Under this mode, issues and pull requests can be opened by anyone, but anything
deemed substantive MUST be resolved exclusively on the mailing list.  Discussion on
GitHub is kept to a minimum.  Only editorial matters can be resolved using the
issue tracker.

Chairs and editors are given discretion in determining what issues are
substantive.  As documents mature, it is generally prudent to err more toward
consulting the mailing list where there is doubt.  As with other Working Group
decisions, chairs are the arbiters in case of dispute.

A recurrent problem with this mode of interaction is the tendency for
discussions to spontaneously develop in the issue tracker.  This requires a
degree of discipline from chairs and editors to ensure that any substantive
matters are taken to the mailing list.

As mailing lists remain the primary venue for discussion of substantive matters,
this mode and the document management only modes remain those most compatible
with existing work practices for Working Groups.  Participants in a Working
Group that operates under either model can reasonably be expected to receive all
relevant communication about the work of the group from the Working Group
mailing list.

Though the mailing list is used for making decisions, the issue tracker can
still be a useful record of the state of issues.  It is often useful if chairs
or editors record details of decisions in issue comments when closing issues as
resolved.


## Issue Discussion Mode

This GitHub interaction mode differs from the other modes in that discussion
relating to substantive technical matters is allowed to occur on GitHub issues.
Though decisions are always subject to confirmation on the mailing list,
participants are permitted to conduct substantive discussions on the issue
tracker.  In some cases, this can include making some decisions without
involving the Working Group mailing list.

A Working Group mailing list remains a critical venue for decision making, even
where issue discussion occurs elsewhere.  Working Group mailing lists generally
include a wider audience than those who follow issue discussion, so difficult
issues always benefit from list discussion.

Decisions about Working Group consensus MUST always be confirmed using the
Working Group mailing list.  However, depending on the maturity of documents,
this might be a more lightweight interaction, such as sending an email
confirmation for a set of resolutions made using GitHub.

Using the mailing list to resolve difficult or controversial issues is strongly
encouraged.  In those cases, the issue tracker might be used to more fully
develop an understanding of problems before initiating a discussion on the
mailing list, along lines similar to the design team process (see Section 6.5 of
{{RFC2418}}).

As a more involved process, adopting this mode can require changes in policies
as documents become more mature.  It is possible to use different processes for
different documents in the Working Group.

Working Group chairs SHOULD confirm that the Working Group has consensus to
adopt any process.  In particular, the introduction of a more tightly-controlled
process can have the effect of privileging positions already captured in
documents, which might disadvantage alternative viewpoints.


### Early Design Phases

During early phases of the design of a protocol, chairs MAY allow editors to
manage all aspects of issues.  Editors are permitted to make decisions about how
to both identify and resolve technical issues, including making any changes that
editors feel necessary.

Chairs need to explicitly decide that this sort of process is needed and
announce the decision to the Working Group.  In many cases, documents that are
adopted by a Working Group are already sufficiently mature that a looser process
is not beneficial.  The primary reason to grant editors more discretionary power
is to improve the speed with which changes can be made.  The risk is that design
changes might not always reflect the consensus of the Working Group.

Changes made by editors under this process do not completely lack oversight.
GitHub and git provide tools for ensuring that changes are tracked and can be
audited.  Within the usual Working Group process it is expected that
Internet-Drafts will receive regular review. Finally, process checkpoints like
Working Group Last Call (WGLC; Section 7.4 of {{!RFC2418}}) provides additional
safeguards against abuse.

Working Groups are advised against allowing editors this degree of flexibility
for the entirety of a document lifecycle.  Once a document is more stable and
mature, it is likely appropriate to move to a more tightly controlled process.


### Managing Mature Documents {#mature-documents}

As a document matures, it becomes more important to understand not just that the
document as a whole retains the support of the Working Group, but that changes
are not made without wider consultation.

Chairs might choose to manage the process of deciding which issues are
substantive.  For instance, chairs might reserve the ability to use the `design`
label to new issues (see {{label-design}}) and to close issues marked as `design`.
Chairs should always allow document editors to identify and address editorial
issues as they see fit.

As documents mature further, explicit confirmation of technical decisions with
the Working Group mailing list becomes more important.

Gaining Working Group consensus about the resolution of issues can be done in
the abstract, with editors being permitted to capture the outcome of discussions
as they see fit.

More mature documents require not only consensus, but consensus about specific
text.  All substantive changes to documents that have passed WGLC SHOULD be
proposed as pull requests, and MUST be discussed on the mailing list, and MUST
have chairs explicitly confirm consensus.  Chairs MAY institute this stricter
process prior to WGLC.

Note:

: It is generally sufficient to trust editors to manage adherence with these
  policies, aided by the transparency provided by the version control system.
  There are tools that can be used to more tightly control access to
  repositories, but they can be overly constraining.


## Issue Labelling Schemes {#labels}

Several schemes for use of issue labels in managing issues have been used
successfully.  This section outlines these strategies and how they might be
applied.

A design/editorial split (see {{label-design}}) is useful in all cases that the
issue tracking capability is used.  Working Groups that only use GitHub for
issue tracking might find that distinction sufficient for their needs.

Working Groups or editors might use additional labels as they choose.  Any label
that is used as part of a process requires that the process be documented and
announced by Working Group chairs.  Editors SHOULD be permitted to use labels to
manage issues without any formal process significance being attached to those
issues.


### Editorial/Design Labelling {#label-design}

The most important distinction about an issue is whether it is substantive.  The
labels of `editorial` and `design` are used to represent this distinction.

An issue labeled as `editorial` has no substantive effect on a document, except
to the extent that addressing the issue might make understanding the
specification easier.  Resolution of `editorial` issues can be left to the
discretion of editors.

An issue labeled as `design` has or might have a substantive effect on a
document.  For protocol specifications, a `design` issue is one that might
affect implementations or interoperability requirements.  Addressing a `design`
issue ultimately requires Working Group consensus, even if the resolution is to
make no change.

This distinction can be applied to all types of document.  For instance, a
`design` issue for an Informational document might be raised to discuss
possible changes to important concepts in the document.


### Decision Labelling {#label-decision}

Labels can be used to manage processes.  As documents mature and issues become
more numerous, labels can be used to clearly mark the status of issues.  In
particular, labelling of issues can be used to help in managing Working Group
decisions.

For documents that are less mature, issues with resolutions but no specific
proposals for changes to text might be marked `editor-ready` as a way of
signaling that there is consensus about an approach, but no specific proposal.
Chairs might use this to signal that discussion is complete and that editors are
to be given discretion in the construction of text.

In contrast, if specific text is a prerequisite for resolving issues, as might
be the case for more mature documents, a `proposal-ready` label might be used by
editors to mark issues that they believe to have acceptable resolutions.

For resolved issues, a `has-consensus` label might be used by chairs to mark
issues for which formal Working Group decisions have been made (Section 6.1 of
{{!RFC2418}}).

A `v2` or `next-version` label might be used to mark and thereby save issues for
a future version of or extension to a protocol, particularly where a resolution
is made to take no action.


### Component Labelling

Repositories with multiple interrelated documents or a complex document with
multiple logical components might benefit from labels that identify different
aspects of the work.  The choice of appropriate labels for components will
depend on the structure of specific documents.


### Other Labels

Other labels can be used depending on the needs of editors and Working Group
processes.  For example,

* An `invalid` label might be used for issues that were raised in error.

* A `blocked` label might indicate an issue is awaiting resolution of an
  external process or related issue.

* A `parked` label might be used to indicate issues that do not require
  immediate Working Group attention.


# Internet-Draft Publication

During the development of a document, individual revisions of a document can be
built and formally submitted as an Internet-Draft.  This creates a stable
snapshot and makes the content of the in-progress document available to a wider
audience.  Documents submitted as Internet-Drafts are not expected to address
all open issues or merge outstanding pull requests.

Editors SHOULD create a new Internet-Draft submission two weeks prior to every
session, which includes IETF meetings, other in-person meetings, and telephone
or video conferences (see Section 7.1 of {{?RFC2418}}).  Though discussion could
use the current version of a document from version control, participants in a
session cannot be expected to monitor changes to documents in real-time; a
published Internet-Draft ensures that there is a common, stable state that is
known to all participants.

Internet-Drafts that use a GitHub repository SHOULD include a notice that
includes a reference to the repository.  This notice might also include
information about where to discuss the draft.

Revisions used to generate documents that are submitted as Internet-Drafts
SHOULD be tagged in repositories to provide a record of submissions.

Working Group chairs MAY request the creation of an Internet-Draft at any time,
in consultation with document editors.


# Assessing Consensus

The work that occurs on GitHub could be part of the consensus process, but the
ultimate decision on consensus regarding a document is made by the chairs
{{!RFC2026}}.

GitHub facilitates more involved interactions, which can result in a much higher
level of activity than a typical Working Group mailing list.  Participants who
wish to limit their time commitment might follow GitHub activity selectively,
either by following only specific issues or by occasionally reviewing the state
of the document.  Other participants might not use GitHub at all.  Chairs are
reminded that assessing consensus based on GitHub content alone cannot be
assumed to reach all interested participants.

Chairs MUST consider input from all discussion venues when assessing consensus
including GitHub, mailing lists, and in-person meetings.  Each venue has
different selection biases that might need to be considered.

A Working Group chair MUST consult the Working Group mailing list for any issue
that is potentially contentious.  Relying on input provided through GitHub alone
might result in gaining input from a narrower set of participants.  This
includes important milestones like Working Group Last-Call, where review from
the widest possible audience ensures a higher quality document.

If permitted, GitHub will be used for technical discussion and decisions,
especially during early stages of development of a document.  Any decisions are
ultimately confirmed through review, and ultimately, through Working Group Last
Call (see Section 7.4 of {{!RFC2418}}).

The use of issues and labels has been effective in managing contentious issues.
Explicitly labeling closed issues to explicitly identify those with formal
consensus means that there is no confusion about the status of issues.


# Continuous Integration

Various third-party services offer the ability to run tests and other work when
changes are made to a repository.

One common practice is to use these continuous integration services to build a
text or HTML version of a document.  This is then published to GitHub Pages,
which allows users to view a version of the most recent revision of a document.
Including a prominent link to this version of the document (such as in the README)
makes it easier for new contributors to find a readable copy of the most recent
version of a draft.  In addition, including links to differences between this
generated version and any published document helps contributors identify recent
changes.

Continuous integration can also validate pull requests and other changes for
errors.  The most basic check is whether the source file can be transformed
successfully into a valid Internet-Draft.  For example, this might include
checking that XML source is syntactically correct.

For a document that use formal languages as part of the specification, such as schema
or source code, a continuous integration system might also be used to validate
any formal language that the document contains.  Tests for any source code that
the document contains might be run, or examples might be checked for
correctness.


# Advice to Editors

Document editors are primarily responsible for maintaining documents.  Taking on
a few additional tasks can greatly improve the process for the Working Group.

Using GitHub means that it is more likely that a contribution is made by users
who are not very familiar with the work.  Pull requests from new contributors can
contain errors or omissions.  Duplicate issues are commonplace.  Proposed
changes might have grammatical errors or they might diverge from existing style.
If a change is generally sound, rather than rejecting the pull request or
requesting changes, editors could instead accept the change and then make any
necessary corrections.

Editors SHOULD NOT close a pull request or issue without first understanding why
the item was created.  Editors and chairs SHOULD try to explain every action
clearly and concisely.  Even if a contributor seems rude, being courteous in response is
always best.

If a contributor makes a comment that raises what a new issue, editors can
create an issue or - if there is an obvious solution - a pull request.  It
does not matter what venue the issue was raised in (e.g., email, issue
discussion, a pull request review); capturing issues quickly ensures that
problems become visible and can be tracked.

This takes a little more effort, but these simple steps can help encourage
contributions, which will ultimately improve the quality of documents.


# Security Considerations

Continuity of operations is always a consideration when taking a dependency on
an external service.  If GitHub were to fail in some way, anyone relying upon
its services would be seriously affected.

Widespread use of git reduces the exposure to a system failure because the
primary repository is replicated in multiple locations.  This includes hosted
web pages; the content of web pages is maintained as a branch in the main
repository.  As specified in {{?GH-CONFIG=I-D.ietf-git-github-wg-configuration}},
maintaining a mirror of a repository hosted on GitHub provides IETF-hosted backups
for WG repositories.

However, other information maintained on GitHub is more vulnerable to loss.
This includes issues and discussion on those issues, discussion and reviews of
commits and pull requests, and any content hosted on the wiki.  Tools exist for
extracting this information for backup.

The potential for malicious actions by compromised or malcontent editors,
chairs and area directors is relevant in maintaining the integrity of the
content that GitHub hosts.  Backups allow for recovery of content, and regular
submissions as Internet-Drafts ensure that work is not lost completely.


# IANA Considerations

This document has no IANA actions.


--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

This work would not have been possible without the hard work of those people who
have trialled use of GitHub at the IETF.  Alia Atlas contributed significant
text to an earlier version of this document.  Tommy Pauly, Rich Salz, and
Christopher Wood all provided significant input.
